---
title: "Over the wire - Bandit 6"
slug: "otw-bandit-6"
layout: post
categories: ctf
tags: 
    - over-the-wire
    - otw-bandit
    - linux
date: 2020-07-12 15:40:00 -0500
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

In this series I will be working through the `bandit` challenges on [overthewire.org](https://overthewire.org/){:target="_blank"} - A site offering `CTF` style wargames.

This post will contain a walkthrough for challenge 6. 

<!--more-->

## Bandit 6

> The password for the next level is stored somewhere on the server and has all of the following properties.
> - Owned by user bandit7
> - Owned by group bandit6
> - 33 bytes in size

Time for another level of `bandit` from [overthewire.org](https://overthewire.org/wargames/bandit/){:target="_blank"}. In this challenge
we'll be looking at some more very useful features of the `find` command. Searching for files owned by a particular user
or group is something that is really useful to know, and has a bunch of real world applications. Let's get started.

```sh
tom@alitebyte:~# ssh bandit6@bandit.labs.overthewire.org -p 2220
```

Looking at the list of file attributes we're looking for, there is one that is very similar to what we had to do in the last 
challenge. Last time we were able to specify a file size for the `find` command to search for.

```sh
bandit6@bandit:~$ find / -size 33c
```

Note that this time we're searching the whole server, instead of just one directory. Because of this if you run the previous command
your screen will immediately be filled with `Permission denied` messages. This spam can make it really difficult to see what is going on,
and for this challenge we don't really care about folders that we don't have permission to read (in more advanced challenges, maybe we 
would, but the bandit series are supposed to be fairly straightforward), so let's just get rid of all that spam. Those permission denied
messages are actually part of the `find` command's `STDERR` output. This means that we can use redirection to get rid of it.

```sh
bandit6@bandit:~$ find / -size 33c 2>/dev/null
```

That's a bit better, but there's still alot of results for us to look through (pretend you don't see the interesting file at the bottom 
of the list, we can get a nicer solution). Looking back at the list of requirements for our file we can see that we can further filter
this list by uesr and group ownership. It's very simple to add both theses requirements to our find command:

- Owned by User: `-user bandit7`
- Owned by Group: `-group bandit6`

Both pretty straightforward, let's put it all together:

```sh
bandit6@bandit:~$ find / -size 33c -user bandit7 -group bandit6 2>/dev/null
```

And just like that we're down to only one possible file (which may or may not have been obviously visible after the very first command we
ran, but that would've been boring :satisfied:)

All that's left is to `cat` that file for the password.

