---
title: "Over the wire - Bandit 5"
slug: "otw-bandit-5"
layout: post
categories: ctf
tags: 
    - over-the-wire
    - bandit
    - linux
date: 2020-07-04 00:00:00 -0500
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

In this series I will be working through the `bandit` challenges on [overthewire.org](https://overthewire.org/){:target="_blank"} - A site offering `CTF` style wargames.

This post will contain a walkthrough for challenge 5. 

<!--more-->

## Bandit 5

> The password for the next level is stored in a file somewhere under the inhere directory and has all of the following properties:
> - Human-readable
> - 1033 bytes in size
> - Not executable

Much like bandit 4, this challenge has us searching through a directory for a file with specific attributes. Of course
lets start by opening an ssh session and passing the password from the previous challenge.

```sh
tom@alitebyte:~# ssh bandit5@bandit.labs.overthewire.org -p 2220  
```

Let's have a look at the `inhere` folder to see what we're dealing with:

```sh
bandit5@bandit:~$ ls inhere/
maybehere00  maybehere03  maybehere06  maybehere09  maybehere12  maybehere15  maybehere18
maybehere01  maybehere04  maybehere07  maybehere10  maybehere13  maybehere16  maybehere19
maybehere02  maybehere05  maybehere08  maybehere11  maybehere14  maybehere17
```

If you check in a few of those directories you'll see that there is a bunch of files, with weird and wonderful names.
We're going to use a the `find` command to search through all these folders and find matching files in one go. Likely 
`find` is a pretty powerful command with lots of arguments for filtering to only find files we're interested in. Let's 
have a look at how to meet each of the requirements:

1. **1033 bytes in size:** This is something that we can easily filter for by using the `size` argument of the `find` 
command. `find -size 1033c` will return all files with the size of 1033 bytes (you can replace the `c` with other
characters to change the units)
2. **Not executable:** Again this is something that's pretty easy for us to do. The `find` command has an `executable` 
argument which will filter the results to only include executable files. Now this isn't quite right for our purposes as
we're interested in files which are NOT executable. We can flip the result of any argument by simply adding a `!` before
it. `find ! -executable`
3. **Human-readable**: We can use the same command that was used in bandit 4 for this bit. The `file` command will 
return the filetype of each file. We can use the `exec` argument of the `find` function to allow us to call a specific 
command on each file that is returned by the find. `find -exec find {} +`

Now if we put it all together we should get one result.

```sh
bandit5@bandit:~$ find inhere/ -size 1033c ! -executable -exec file {} +
inhere/maybehere07/.file2: ASCII text, with very long lines
```

Looks like we have a winner, `cat` the file and you will have the password.
